Care about people’s approval and you will be their prisoner. –Tao Te Ching

Yellow highlight | Page: 8
The more you value things, the less you value yourself. The more you depend upon others for esteem, the less you are self-sufficient . . . Freedom discovers man the moment he loses concern over what impression he is making or about to make. –Bruce Lee
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 10
“Body sculpting is 85% diet . . . if you don’t have your diet down first, the rest is moot . . . People are often skeptical of my statement that bodybuilding is 85 percent nutrition. The average bodybuilder vastly underestimates the value of diet and overestimates how good his own eating program is.” -Vince Gironda
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 10
If you retain only one piece of information from this book, or any of my past or future content, I hope that it’s this: your nutritional habits will have a far greater impact on your fat loss and 6-pack goals than any other fitness component.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 12
Was that book The Truth about Carbs by any chance (shameless book plug alert)?
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 14
The simple summary of my fat-slashing style, so far: Use diet for 80% of your fat loss.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 16
Now flip the script. How many physique athletes and fitness models do you think know their calorie intake down to the last decimal point? And if you are tracking the grams of your macros—protein, carbs, fats—you are indirectly tracking calories.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 17
Calories definitely matter and are the most important number to get right in the fat loss equation.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 17
Each year many people go on a diet to lose weight. An active area of research is examining the efficacy and safety of energy-deficient diets that have different proportions of the macronutrients. At this time size of the caloric deficit appears to be more important to weight loss than the composition of the diet. Weight loss has been reported with both low-carbohydrate, high-fat diets and high-carbohydrate, low-fat diets. –Gropper et al. Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 27
There are scientists hired by processed food companies to create the most palatable foods possible. They experiment with different combinations of refined sugar, fats, salt, and flavorings to make these foods almost impossible to not overeat. You can’t avoid them, and you can’t stop eating them once you start. I won’t go as far as to say they cause addiction, but they operate on similar pathways. Food companies are literally exploiting natural food reward mechanisms in the human body to increase their sales (and, unfortunately, our waistlines in the process).
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 34
Despite receiving no instruction to reduce calorie intake, the Paleolithic group only ate 1,388 calories per day, compared to 1,823 calories per day for the Mediterranean group. That’s a remarkably low ad libitum calorie intake in the former (and a fairly low intake in the latter as well). With such a low calorie intake over 12 weeks, you might think the Paleolithic group was starving. Fortunately, the authors had the foresight to measure satiety, or fullness, in both groups during the intervention. They found that satiety was almost identical in the two groups, despite the 24% lower calorie intake of the Paleolithic group.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 35
Additional research confirms the highest satiety foods are root vegetables (potatoes, sweet potatoes, yams), whole fruit, and animal proteins.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 35
Of course, it should come as no surprise that the low-satiety foods you should cut back on are processed foods full of refined sugar, vegetable oil, and/or flour.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 38
It’s like a Paleo/caveman-style diet with a few more starchy carbs from root vegetables and rice in order to better fuel and recover from the high-intensity training that is going to be necessary to build muscle, slash fat, and carve up your 6-pack. 1. Animal proteins—fish, shellfish, poultry, meat, game meat, eggs. 2. Whole fruit—juicy melons, long bananas, perfect peach bottoms, strawberries in the sack . . . whatever you prefer. Also berries, pineapple, apples, oranges, etc. 3. Root vegetables (also called starchy tubers = the geekiest word on the planet)—yams, sweet potatoes, potatoes, taro root, burdock, pumpkin, squash, etc. 4. Vegetables—you know, greens ’n’ things. 5. White rice—this is a special case with a long, boring, and geeky story behind it. The short summary is that white rice is a pure starch without all of the compounds in most cereal grains that can be problematic for human digestion, and it can be included as an additional carb source in the diet once your baseline essential nutrient and micronutrient needs have been met by animal and plant foods. For more on this topic, you can read this post on my website.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 40
Eating fewer, regular-sized meals with higher amounts of lean protein can make one feel more full than eating smaller, more frequent meals, according to new research from Purdue University. We found that when eating high amounts of protein, men who were trying to lose weight felt fuller throughout the day; they also experienced a reduction in late-night desire to eat and had fewer thoughts of food.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 43
Research on Optimum Protein Amounts
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 43
So we need more than the RDA but less than the steroid extreme. What’s the sweet spot?
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 43
The majority of the research suggests 1.5-2.0g/kg, which equals 0.7-0.9g/lbs of bodyweight.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 43
Shoot for a daily protein intake of 0.7-0.9g/lbs of lean body mass or target body weight (if you want, you can round up to the fitness standard of 1g/lbs of lean body mass for a little extra satiety and muscle preserving insurance).
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 44
The foundation of our efficient fat-slashing approach is starting to take shape: 1. Get in a calorie deficit 2. Reduce refined and hyperpalatable foods 3. Emphasize high satiety whole foods 4. Eat an adequate amount of protein
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 45
After close to 20 years in the game, here is what I have found to be the fastest, most effective, most efficient, and most sustainable way to transform your physique and look good at the beach (at least for a busy professional who wants to maintain some sort of career, family, social, and sex life). 1. Use diet for 80% of your fat loss. 2. Strength train to build lean muscle & shape, tighten, and tone your body. 3. Increase non-formal activity levels (i.e., walk more as part of your day) for the final 20% of fat loss.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 46
Not only do women have fewer muscle fibers than men, especially in the upper body, but additionally, the primary anabolic (muscle-building) hormone—testosterone—is dramatically lower in women than in men.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 47
The real explanation for the difference in bulking up and looking masculine between men and women is a difference in hormone levels. Men have higher amounts of testosterone, a highly anabolic hormone that leads to increased muscular growth. Women have higher levels of estrogen, which leads to more body fat accumulation and is the reason why women, on average, carry more body fat than men.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 47
Women have miniscule amounts of testosterone compared to men, and their propensity to bulk up from weight training is very limited compared to that of a man. By the way, the overly masculine female bodybuilders you sometimes see in magazines are injecting themselves with steroids (synthetic versions of the male hormone testosterone) in order to attain unnatural levels of muscularity. Unless you are “juicing” it up, you have no reason to fear you’ll morph into the Incredible Hulk.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 48
Efficient training for physique development is exactly the opposite of the fitness trends and fads. It uses the complicated science of Kinesiology and Biomechanics to yield relatively simple exercises and simple programs.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 49
Sure, I may use some machines and isolated cable systems work for weak-point training and/or to correct muscle imbalances and computer posture, but the majority of the training should be focused on basic bodyweight, barbell, and dumbbell exercises (squat and deadlift variations, lunge variations, pull-ups, dips, push-ups, various free weight rows and presses, etc.).
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 51
Like Bruce Lee, I’m not tied to any dogmatic system. I just want what works—and traditional hypertrophy training works, no doubt about it.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 51
Miyaki’s Preferred Method: The Physique Cheat Sheet The above charts are more for university students and professional trainers, and to be honest, are kind of incomplete. I have my own “cheat sheet” for building The Beach Physique. Here it is: 1. Train each muscle group once every 3-5 days. Beginners can do a full-body routine twice a week; Intermediates could do something like a 3-day alternating push/pull split (one week perform 2 push workouts and 1 pull workout, the next week perform 2 pull workouts and 1 push workout); and Advanced can do a 4-day upper body/lower body or 4-5-day body part split. 2. Perform 3-8 sets per muscle group per training session. That can be 1 exercise per muscle group for 3-8 sets (a la Vince Gironda or German Volume Training), or 2-3 sets of multiple exercises per muscle group (traditional bodybuilding). 3. Perform 8-20 reps per set, using 65-85% of your 1-rep max. 4. Use good form. To ensure good form, many trainers/coaches will recommend rep tempos. I like a 2-0-1-0 tempo: Lower the weight under control (two seconds) and lift with some controlled force (one second). Don’t pause or lockout your joints at either end of the motion (0 seconds at top/bottom).
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 52
5. Rest 30-90 seconds between each set.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 52
Sample 3-Day Training Split
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 65
Chronic carb depletion combined with anaerobic training can eventually lead to muscle loss. The body will break down amino acids as a reserve fuel to provide the glucose necessary to fuel the brain and central nervous system at rest, as well as the muscles during high-intensity activity.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 67
The training of performance-based athletes tends to be higher in duration and frequency—they may train 2-4 hours a day, sometimes twice a day. This is unnecessary for physique development. A traditional hypertrophy routine consists of 3-4, 40-60 minute strength-training workouts a week. So performance athletes generally have much higher calorie and carbohydrate demands.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 69
If carbs are too low for too long, you’ll lose muscle no matter how much protein you eat, period!
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 70
The other negative; those who train with weights using a very low-carb diet often lose muscle because you need an adequate carbohydrate intake to preserve and hold muscle mass. When carbs are cut too low, you burn a lot of muscle while you train. When you burn muscle, you initiate a drop in metabolism because the total amount of muscle one carries is directly linked to burning calories. When you have a lot of muscle, you burn a lot of calories and when you add muscle, you upgrade your metabolism. On the other hand, when you burn muscle, you downgrade your metabolism. I call it dumb dieting. Most dieters who train with weights can see great results by modifying their carb intake from 2 or more grams recommended in the mass gaining phase to 1 to 1.5 grams per pound of bodyweight in order to cut up. That would mean a 200 pound bodybuilder or athlete eating 400 or more grams daily to build mass would drop down to 200 to 300 grams to cut up—without resorting to extreme low carbs, which has the potential to cause a quick drop in muscle mass and metabolism.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 71
To summarize this annoyingly long section and my preferred fat loss diet starting point in general: 1. Set calories at 11-13 cals/lb of lean body mass or target bodyweight. 2. Set protein at 0.7-0.9g/lb of lean body mass or target bodyweight, rounding up to 1.0g/lb if you wish. 3. Set dietary fat at 0.2-0.33g/lb of lean body mass or target bodyweight. The majority should come as a by-product of your protein sources. 4. Fill in all remaining calories with carbohydrates. This will likely fall in the range of 1-2g/lb of lean body mass or target bodyweight. If you’d like to learn more about the details, science, and strategies regarding targeted carbohydrate intake and fat loss diet numbers in general, you can check out my book The Truth about Carbs.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 73
Hitting a punching bag is one thing. Hitting a moving target that is also swinging back (real life with new challenges and obstacles popping up every day) is something completely different.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 75
To contrast, the traditional Japanese diet yields some of the lowest obesity and diabetes rates in the world. A three-meal pattern for that would look something like this: eggs and rice for breakfast; chicken, veggies, and rice for lunch; fish, veggies, and rice for dinner.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 76
Eating fewer, regular-sized meals with higher amounts of lean protein can make one feel more full than eating smaller, more frequent meals, according to new research from Purdue University. We found that when eating high amounts of protein, men who were trying to lose weight felt fuller throughout the day; they also experienced a reduction in late-night desire to eat and had fewer thoughts of food.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 77
Feast at night. That’s right. Regardless of whatever meal frequency pattern you choose (the traditional three, more fitness-style small meal spreads, intermittent fasting, etc.), save a significant percentage of your calorie and carb intake so you can have a complete, satiating dinner at night. Escalate carb and calorie intake up throughout the day vs. tapering it down. I know that goes against everything you normally hear in the fitness industry, but if everything you heard in the fitness industry actually worked, there’d be a lot more people walking around in great shape.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 77
1. Evolutionary Instinct Human beings evolved on a fasting and feeding cycle. We spent the majority of our existence eating lighter during the day while actively tracking, hunting, and gathering our food. We spent the evening relaxing and feasting on the majority, if not all, of our daily food intake. So it’s our natural instinct to eat big at night, based on thousands of years of evolution. For some odd and inexplicable reason, most diet plans work off a structure that goes completely against this (eat big during the day and then try to cut calories and carbs, and starve at night). That’s why most diet plans suck in terms of long-term adherence. To give yourself the best shot at succeeding beyond a 60-day time frame, or whatever, I believe you should go with, not against, your nature.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 81
Sample 3 & Feast Template: Breakfast 1 serving of animal protein (3 eggs or leftover meat, fish, poultry, etc.) 1 piece of whole fruit   Lunch 1-2 servings of animal protein (meat, fish, poultry, etc.) 1 serving of starchy carbohydrates (rice or root vegetables) Optional: any non-starchy vegetables   Dinner 1-3 servings of animal protein (meat, fish, poultry, etc.) 1-4 servings of starchy carbohydrates (rice or root vegetables) Optional: any non-starchy vegetables   *Adjust your serving sizes based on your specific calorie and macronutrient numbers. *1 serving of animal protein = about the size of a deck of cards or iPhone *1 serving of starch = about the size of a baseball or closed fist
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 86
None of what we did was formal exercise; we just completed the necessary tasks of the day, whatever that might have been. In fact, we used as little energy as possible during most of the day in order to conserve energy for when it was absolutely necessary for survival. And when it was time to move, we frickin’ moved, baby. We sprinted away from predators or towards prey. We climbed trees, hoisted objects, swung weapons, and clubbed stuff to death with maximal exertion. These are all predominantly anaerobic activities. We’re not meant to reach arbitrary fat-burning zones for arbitrary amounts of time. We’re meant to alternate periods of kicking back with periods of kicking ass. That’s how you efficiently build a functional, lean physique.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 86
Most people underestimate the power of simply attempting to walk more during a typical day. Yet a few of the most successful natural bodybuilders of all-time—John Hansen and Dave Goodin—shun traditional cardio in favor of outdoor walking in their pre-contest routines. They know that walking is a small yet powerful tool in their fitness arsenal. Here are some of the specific benefits: 1. Walking can give us many of the same benefits as traditional cardio—calorie burn, increased cardiovascular efficiency, lowered blood pressure, etc.—without all of the drawbacks—joint wear and tear, repetitive strain, negative hormonal impact (overdoing traditional cardio can lead to increased cortisol output and testosterone suppression). It increases blood flow with minimal stress on the nervous, hormonal, and muscular systems. This may actually help you recover from intense strength-training sessions, whereas most other forms of cardio training would impair that recovery process.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 87
2. It is convenient. It can be done anytime, anywhere, and can be squeezed in to any part of the day (even multiple times), not as a “formal” training session you have to plan for. No equipment, change of clothes, or commute to the gym is necessary. 3. It is not as boring as staring at a wall. With some outdoor walking, you get varied stimulus—buildings, trees, restaurants, blue sky, hot girls or guys (whatever you prefer) out on the town, etc., all depending on where you decide to go. 4. It is a good stress reliever. With the high stress of corporate jobs and modern living, walking is a good way to unwind, take your mind off things, and let your brain relax. If work is stressing you out, you are anxious and tense, and you feel like you are going to kill your boss or yourself, take a walk to clear your head. It helps.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 88
You can “talk business” or have an informal meeting with a colleague or client while walking somewhere. That’s probably better than sitting right in front of them in an enclosed office wanting to rip their head off.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 91
Despite tracking being a little bit of a pain in the butt in the short-term, it creates a lot more dietary flexibility in the long-term. Want to work in some different foods to your “living lean year-round” lifestyle plan? Don’t want to give up bread and pasta forever? Dig the occasional dessert? Cool, just make sure your occasional food choices off the template fit within your targeted diet numbers for the day, and you’ll keep slashing that fat away.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 92
Going from out of shape to decent shape is one thing. But going from good shape to the cover of a fitness magazine is a whole other thing. If you want to jump to the next physique class, this often necessitates being more detailed and consistent with your diet numbers. I should rephrase that to be more accurate. It’s not often. It is every time.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 92
The more ambitious your goals become, the more detailed and disciplined you need to be to achieve them. It is no different than any other profession or venture. For example, getting out of debt is one thing. Getting rich is another.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 97
But back to the lesson at hand and our fat-slashing game plan. For beginners, it is pretty straightforward. Girl or dude, you are probably just eating way too much refined and fast food. Clean it up, control your portions, get in that damn calorie deficit necessary for fat loss, and frickin’ stay there on a daily basis.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 98
You see, the human body is a highly adaptive organism and eventually adapts to any calorie deficit. The net effect is that the longer and more consistently you diet, the harder it becomes to continue getting results, and the more likely it is that you will hit a plateau. This is related to a hormone called leptin, which downregulates during caloric restriction. Reduced leptin levels increase hunger and cravings while slowing the metabolic rate and reducing energy expenditure—not a good combo for slashing stubborn fat.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 99
The Calorie Boost Solution Periodic overfeeding—or a couple of days of calorie surpluses sprinkled in among days of calorie deficits—can offset some of the negative effects of chronic caloric restriction. A day or two of refeeding can boost leptin, testosterone, thyroid, and growth hormone to normal, prediet levels. It can resensitize the body to the fat loss process and help you break through a plateau. Due to restocked glycogen stores, it can also ramp up lagging training intensity and enthusiasm that can slowly set in during prolonged calorie deficits.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 105
My preferred plan is to spend most of the week in a slight calorie deficit (five to six days a week), with one to two carb refeed days. Many physique competitors and fitness models use this approach with great success. More extreme carb cycling can definitely work, and if you feel great on that plan, keep sticking to it. But I don’t think it’s necessary for optimum results. There are a variety of ways you can structure your diet and reach the same end goal; the key is finding what makes your plan the easiest to follow in the real world.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 108
let’s summarize it in an “Official” 6-Pack Checklist. 1. Get in the calorie deficit necessary for fat loss (10-13 calories/lb of lean body mass or target bodyweight). 2. Cut back on refined, processed, and hyperpalatable foods. 3. Emphasize predominantly high satiety whole foods (the island-style diet is a decent template: animal proteins, whole fruit, root vegetables, vegetables, and white rice). 4. Eat optimum levels of protein (0.7-0.9g/lb of lean body mass or target bodyweight, rounding up to 1g/lb if you wish). 5. Strength train a few times a week with hypertrophy parameters. 6. Keep dietary fat intake moderate in order to leave some room for carbs (0.2-0.33g/lb of lean body mass or target bodyweight). 7. Fill in all remaining calories with carbohydrates. This will likely fall in the range of 1-2g/lb of lean body mass or target bodyweight. 8. Use whatever diet structure makes sticking to your plan as practical, functional, and sustainable as possible. My suggested starting point is the 3 & Feast Strategy: Eat 3 protein-based meals a day—the traditional breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Escalate your carb intake, and eat the highest percentage of your calories and carbs at night. Keep your daytime meals to a carb:pro ratio of 1:1 or less. 9. Add some non-exercise-specific physical activity (NEPA) if necessary. Start with a 30-60 minute walk on your off days. 10. Track your food intake, calories, and macronutrients if you are having trouble making progress or if you want to ramp it up to reach your peak. I recommend MyFitnessPal. 11. Make subtle adjustments if/when you hit a sticking point. Start by reducing calories by 1cal/lb of lean body mass or target weight, or 5-15% of calories. The reduction should come primarily via carbohydrates. 12.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 109
Integrate calorie spikes/carb refeeds when lean. My preferred method is a 5-2 Plan. Five to six days a week eat your base fat loss diet (10-13 calories per/lb). This includes training and non-training days. One to two days a week, spike calories to maintenance levels or higher (15+) primarily via increasing carbs.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 110
Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do. –Bruce Lee When you understand what I am telling you, apply what you have learned to your everyday life . . . I am not interested with your talk about my ideas. I am more interested in your applying them to your life. –Miyamoto Musashi
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 110
Always remember that it is not what you read, think, analyze, plan, calculate, or talk about in this world that gives you results. It is all about what you DO.
                

Yellow highlight | Page: 113
Nate Miyaki is an author, athlete, and public speaker. He has been featured in The Huffington Post, Men’s Fitness, Men’s Health, Shape, Muscle & Fitness, Livestrong, and Paleo Fx. He is a two-time natural bodybuilding champion and has worked as a fitness model and representative for several fitness brands. He speaks for corporate wellness programs, at health and fitness seminars, and consults privately with clients, ranging from pro athletes to busy professionals and entrepreneurs. He maintains a fitness, philosophy, and motivational blog at: NateMiyaki.com. He was born and raised in the San Francisco Bay Area and graduated from the University of California, Berkeley. And yes, he wrote this bio in the third person in hopes that it convinces you that he is way more important than he actually is!